you know what we do not talk about
mercury enough like I know it's not as
cool as like Venus or Mars or in any of
the gas giants either because it's
pretty small and it's so hot
everything's so arid there but if it
wasn't for mercury we would not
understand general relativity half as
well as we do and Mercury's orbit was
actually the very first proof of
Einstein's theory of general relativity
that we ever had
so when Einstein came up with his new
theory of gravity in 1916 his theory of
general relativity he did that through
saying if we can imagine gravity as
curved space-time any object that has
mass will curve space-time and the
bigger the object the more it will curb
the space around it so that objects also
traveling along that space will travel
along that curved path and get their
trajectories changed then he said we
could think of planetary orbits just
like that and when he did that he came
up with a whole new suite of equations
to describe his theory of general
relativity now that was all well and
good but it was just the erratically
it's one thing to actually just say mass
bend space-time but you actually also
have to prove that as well and so
Einstein came up with three tests that
you could do to confirm whether this was
the case the first one he said would be
that stars positions would change during
a solar eclipse and that was because we
were blocking out the light of the Sun
we could see the stars behind it and we
could see that the light from them has
been bent around the Sun on their way to
earth now he had to wait about four
years to actually get that proof from
Eddington in the 1919 solar eclipse so
we couldn't use that at the time in 1916
to prove it the second test that he came
up with was this idea of gravitational
redshift so a redshift is when light has
its wavelength stretched out to longer
wavelengths or lower energies or redder
colors why we call it a red shift and
that happens because of the expansion of
the universe as well mainly because when
we observe it but it can happen if light
is also
being dragged backwards by the
gravitational pull of something as it
tries to travel up and out of that
curved space-time
unfortunately in 1916 Einstein didn't
have any way of proving whether that was
right either in fact we had to wait till
1954 when a chap called popper finally
proved it was happening around Stars and
the third test that Einstein came up
with was whether it could predict
planetary orbits so having observed a
planet in a specific position one night
could you predict where it was gonna be
in a month's time from the equations
that he derived and in particular he
wanted to try and explain the orbit of
mercury because it had been long been
known that Mercury's orbit was a little
bit dodgy so Newton's equations of
gravity that had been sort of the
leading theory of gravity since 1713
when he published Principia and he took
catalyst laws of planetary motion and
how the planets go around the Sun and
generalized it into this big theory of
gravity and so while those equations
gave really good predictions for where
the rest of the planets and the sky
would be after observing them you know
for a month later for Mercury it always
gave slightly the wrong answer and no
one knew why that was for a very long
time until 1859 when the very a
published a huge long list of the
position of mercury over a number of
years and found that what was actually
happening was that its perihelion was
processing planets don't actually orbit
in perfect circles actually ellipses and
so at some points it's a bit further
away and some points it's closer and the
point at which it's closest is its
perihelion it comes from the latin peri
meaning closing Helion meeting sun and
what the varier found was that that
wasn't always in the exact same place in
mercury orbit it was actually moving
with mercury if you were actually to
plot Mercury's orbit out what it will
look like it's kind of like a spirograph
pattern to people remember that game I
absolutely loved that game as a kid I
usually find me just think of a time
with like lots of different colored pens
anyway that is what Mercury's orbit
would look like if you saw it over
centuries now that diagram I just showed
is a huge exaggerated
what this effect actually looks like a
single orbit of mercury only takes
something like 88 Earth days and so you
can't see it over a single orbit you
have to wait many many orbits for this
effect to sort of stack up for you to be
able to see it in fact when the very a
actually measured how much it processed
each year in the sky he found that it
was something like one and a half
degrees per century essentially or if
you want to use a different unit it's
5,600 arc seconds a century so an arc
minute is when you take a degree and
split it into 60 and then if you take an
arc minute and split it into 60 again
you get an arc second which is a tiny
tiny unit but sometimes movements on the
sky are that tiny and we do need to
measure things in arc seconds now this
wasn't that much of a surprise that this
was actually happening because in
Newtonian gravity it was expected when
there's something that is quite close to
a massive object but is also being
perturbed slightly by all the other
objects in the system so the main reason
why Mercury's orbit does this is because
it's not just interacting with the Sun
but it's also feeling the pull of all
the other seven planets that are also
orbiting the Sun at the same time the
thing is if you use the equations in
Newton's theory of gravity to predict
how much Mercury's orbit should process
per century
you only get something like five
thousand five hundred and fifty seven
arc seconds per century not five
thousand six hundred
arc seconds per century so there's 43
arc seconds of precession that
unaccounted for by Newton's laws of
gravity
no nice 59 when the Varia announced this
he said that 43 arc seconds unaccounted
for could be due to the fact that the
Sun isn't perfectly round it could be an
oblate spheroid which means it's kind of
squashed at the poles just like what
Saturn is because it's rotating very
quickly and it did turn out that that
plays a small part but it's not enough
to account for 43 arc seconds per
century or Lavar EA said there must be
another planet inside the orbit of
mercury orbiting the Sun
could explain the fact that we're
getting this extra 43 arc seconds and if
we put that into the equations it should
all come out with 5600 arc seconds per
century now at the time in 1859 that was
the most favored hypothesis because 13
years earlier in 1846 lavare ei himself
and Johann Galle had actually found
nephew they discovered Neptune through a
motivated search for another planet
because of the weird orbit of Uranus
that couldn't be explained and was
suggested the only reason that it was
like that was because there was another
planet beyond it that was Puteri yet
slightly and pulling on it more so as
odd is an extra planet inside the orbit
of mercury - you and me sounds like then
it wasn't such an outlandish idea
because well they'd only just discover
Neptune it was that feeling that there
could be something else out there that
had never been spotted and so this
hypothetical planet inside of Mercury
was dubbed Vulcan after the Roman god of
volcanoes and fire and forges now
through the rest of the 19th century
confirming that this hypothetical planet
Vulcan existed was peoples top priority
and obviously people wanted to be the
person who discovered it and there was a
lot of false claims throughout most of
the 19th century including people that
were adamant that they'd seen something
transiting across the face of the Sun
despite the fact that someone who was
observing the other side of the world at
the exact same time didn't see anything
there were people that claimed they'd
spotted a planet during the solar
eclipse very close to the Sun in a
position where no known star was thought
to be but really highlighted the fact
that these were all false claims though
was there every single observation gave
us a different answer for the properties
of Vulcan and Vulcans orbit so some
would claim that it was further in
towards the Sun some claim that it was
further out some more massive and some
less massive if they'd all agreed then
that would have probably been quite a
convincing hypothesis but it became
pretty clear pretty quickly that this
hypothetical planet wasn't actually
there and couldn't explain the strange
precession of Mercury's perihelion as it
orbited the Sun
now this is where Einstein comes in in
1915 with his theory of general
relativity that said that masses curved
space-time and all other objects travel
along that curved space-time and the
equations that he came up with
essentially described that curved
surface or geodesics as he referred with
the mass that all the masses would then
be traveling along and so from that
general equation of curved surfaces he
managed to apply it to the solar system
and get equations for what the orbits of
the planets would be like given the fact
that they were traveling on the curved
space-time created by the Sun and he
found that his general equation for the
planets reduced down to exactly Newton's
equations just plus one extra term and
that extra term was two G M over C
squared R cubed so G is the big
gravitational constant that tells us
sort of how strong gravity generally is
in the universe M is the mass of the Sun
C being the speed of light and our being
the distance of the planet ie mercury in
this case from the Sun so it wasn't that
Newton's equations were wrong at all it
was just that that term disappears when
you have either very small masses so
like the things that we experienced on
earth when we throw balls in the air or
projectiles or very large distances
between objects like with the majority
of the planets in the solar system it's
just that for mercury which is much
closer to the Sun and so has a much
smaller value of R ie distance from the
Sun that term no longer tends to zero if
you divide by a small number you get a
much larger number and so that term is
much more important for Mercury's orbit
than it is for any other planet in the
solar system
so what Newton's laws really were were
an approximation that just didn't happen
to hold for mercury it's also worth
noting here that you Hannes Kepler who
came up with the laws of planetary
motion that Newton took to apply to his
theory of gravity in progeria they were
written down in the early 1600s and that
was back in a time when people including
Kepler
thought the speed of light was infinite
now in Einstein's extra term you divide
by the speed of light squared so you're
dividing by infinity squared which is
infinity and if you divided by infinity
then you're gonna get essentially zero
mathematicians won't like me say not
that dividing by infinity gives you zero
it tends to zero is what you should
technically say it's a singularity but
I'm happy with just saying that it
divides by zero sorry I feel like all of
the numberphile professors are gonna
descend on me saying essentially it
gives you something incredibly
incredibly small and so that extra term
of Einstein's would always have
disappeared back in the 1600s when they
thought that the speed of light was
infinite but we now know through many
many different painstaking ways of
measuring it that the speed of light is
not infinite it actually has a finite
speed of about 300 million meters per
second which incidentally you couldn't
measure in a microwave with some
marshmallows which is a super-fun
experiment for a Sunday afternoon and
would highly recommend it you won't get
the most precise answer but you will get
something in the right ballpark which is
pretty damn cool for a microwave and
some marshmallows so what Einstein did
next with his extra term was work out
how much of an effect it would have on
the predicted position of a planet and
in particular how much extra precession
of the perihelion of mercury did it give
you and when he plugged in the numbers
he found it gave you an extra forty
three arc seconds per century on that
procession the estimate at the time of
the amount of precession that was
unaccounted for was 45 plus or minus
five arc seconds per century and so
Einstein rather anticlimactically at the
end of his paper sort of announcing
general activity and giving this proof
of it through Mercury's orbit stated
that it showed full compatibility ie it
proved his completely groundbreaking
theory it's worth stating here actually
that to do this Einstein actually made a
massive approximation when he went from
his big general theory of geodesics and
curved space-time to giving the
equations for the planets around the Sun
it actually took Schwarz Shields
a couple of months later having looked
at Einsteins work and going yes this is
great to actually come up with the non
approximated solution to all of these
equations but with the advancement of
telescopes and radar throughout the 20th
century we've actually been able to
confirm that the same thing happens for
the other planets all the other planets
perihelion processes as well just by a
tiny tiny amount that is also predicted
by general relativity so for Earth our
perihelion processes 3.84 arcseconds per
century because of this effect venus 8.6
two arc seconds per century it's so
small that back then people would never
have actually been able to observe it
and realize that there was actually a
problem I mean this is really cool but I
bet a lot of you are thinking why should
we care
[Applause]
[Music]
like yeah we have a better theory of
gravity now and we can explain how the
orbits of the planets move but that
doesn't really change things down here
on earth and we're working with the
small masses the Newton's equations just
give a good enough approximation to it's
why we still all learn them in school
well it's actually our understanding of
general relativity that allows us to
actually have a global positioning
service so the satellites that go around
the earth that essentially every time
you want to know your position on your
phone from maps or weather or whatever
it is they send a pin to the satellite
and they triangulate between two or
three different satellites where you are
on earth down to you know meters
precision and that's only possible
through our knowledge of general
relativity because the satellites as
they're moving around the earth they're
moving in the curved space-time that the
presence of Earth gives us and so
they're actually affected by this idea
of gravitational redshift all of those
pings of communications they send down
to earth and back up the satellites are
affected by this gravitational redshift
and so if we don't correct for the fact
that the timing between them will be
slightly off each time they would be out
by something like ten kilometers per day
so the next time you pull out your phone
to use maps or to look at the weather
for your exact location and get minute
by minute when it's gonna rain and when
it's gonna stop raining or you use the
Sat Nav in your car just think of
mercury and of Einstein and a spark
shield and just say a little thank you
in general to physics and that's only
possible because we were founded and
that's only two G M over C squared R
cubed then connected with gravity and
Principia in 15 whatever it was when was
pretty apparent Tippie uplink you see I
think appear kepler actually thought
listen perfect my Amazon parcel that you
tell me to if you need you need me to be
with you I will
where you lead
[Music]